---
layout: book
section: documentation
category: MBTiles
title: Metadata
permalink: /metadata
---
<p><big>Store key metadata in MBTiles to keep your maps informative and complete wherever they go.</big></p>

The MBTiles specification has a `metadata` SQL table dedicated to storing any additional fields you need. The following fields are some standard fields described in the specification:

<ul class='checklist'>
<li><b>name</b>: The plain-english name of the tileset.</li>
<li><b>version</b>: One or more numbers describing the version of the tileset.</li>
<li><b>description</b>: A sentence or two describing the tileset.</li>
<li><b>format</b>: The image format contained in the MBTiles file (e.g. png or jpeg).</li>
<li><b>minzoom</b>: The maximum zoom level available in the tileset.</li>
<li><b>maxzoom</b>: The minimum zoom level available in the tileset.</li>
<li><b>bounds</b>: The maximum extent of the rendered map area.</li>
<li><b>legend</b>: HTML markup for a map legend.</li>
<li><b>formatter</b>: A JavaScript formatter for outputting interactive elements.</li>
</ul>

In additional metadata fields can be added though may not be supported by all implementations.

## Reading metadata

Download the [Blue Marble Topography](http://a.tiles.mapbox.com/mapbox/download/blue-marble-topo-jan.mbtiles) tileset and open it in an SQLite client. Run the following query:

    SELECT * FROM metadata;

    name        | Blue Marble Topography (January)
    type        | baselayer
    description | NASA's 'Blue Marble' global composite satellite imagery ...
    version     | 1.0.0
    bounds      | -179.99,-85.05,179.99,85.05

The results show each metadata field and its value.

## Writing metadata

Inserting a new field into the metadata table by running the following:

    INSERT INTO metadata VALUES('author', 'The MapBox team');

Now when you run the query again you will see your inserted value.

    SELECT * FROM metadata;

    name        | Blue Marble Topography (January)
    type        | baselayer
    description | NASA's 'Blue Marble' global composite satellite imagery ...
    version     | 1.0.0
    bounds      | -179.99,-85.05,179.99,85.05
    author      | The MapBox team

